do
welcome to topcast episode 98 and
appropriately as we get close to the
century the 100th episode of
topcast a podcast ostensibly called the
theory of knowledge cast we reach
chapter five of the science of canon
can't and that chapter chapter number
five is called simply
knowledge i say it's appropriate because
the science of canon can't is of course
one of the newest
deepest
theories of physics and in fact this
makes it one of the broadest theories of
physics as well and the science of canon
cart constructor theory
brings in
knowledge within the orbit of physics
which is amazing epistemology is being
if it isn't already being subsumed by
some fundamental physics fundamental
physics in the form of constructor
theory so this means our popeyrian
vision of knowledge which itself is the
most modern vision of knowledge hitherto
has now been given a 21st century update
by david deutsch and kiara maletta so
we're going to explore that today and
this really appeals to me because like
so many people who are drawn to science
in the first place because well yes it's
fun but also because it subtracts out so
much of people's emotions and feelings
and opinions on any given topic that
might otherwise lead them astray in not
thinking clearly and objectively about
any issue at hand and in a sense this is
timely and i often don't like to talk
about timely things on this podcast but
this one
might stand the test of time
unfortunately because right now we are
in the midst of what i think is a real
pushback against anything that might be
considered rational reasonable objective
we are told that so much of our politics
history and even science is about
feelings and emotions this is not the
way that science and reason should be
sure emotions are important but they
don't have primacy at best in places
like science they can be an indication
of what one might want to pursue or how
one
might be curious about a particular
topic but they are not the thing that
decides what is true but we are so often
now taught about what's true for me or
true for you or true for the individual
rather than
actually objectively true and known
these are separate things and as always
when any emotion comes up at any time it
really needs to be interpreted in the
light of a good explanation for us to
really understand what the meaning of
any particular emotion might be at root
level so there has been a resurgent in
recent years of subjectivity there can
be many reasons for this i suppose but
to put a spin on it from actual
epistemology
too much emphasis being placed on
so-called beliefs personal opinions and
subjective emotions and this stems deep
down in my opinion in a deep way
from cleaving rather too closely to
traditional outdated false notions of
what knowledge is in the first place i
like to say that popper is the
philosopher of common sense so man on
the street generally has a popular
notion of what knowledge is but academia
is very much saturated in well academic
notions of what knowledge is and
increasingly generations of students
appear to be inculcated with ways of
thinking about knowledge and knowledge
claims which are more and more
subjectivists where does this come from
well it comes from ultimately the
ancients but all the way through to
today in modern incantations of this
same sort of subjectivist notion of
knowledge there isn't much in the way of
intellectual self-defense against
subjectivist notions of knowledge and so
everyone's opinion then stands on equal
footing even with things that are not so
much a matter of opinion as a matter of
deciding between good explanations given
certain evidence if knowledge is as the
ancients thought about justifying as
true beliefs
then we can all have things justified to
us in different ways and to different
extents perhaps just our personal
confidence or deep feelings on the
matter are sufficient justifications
so when i know something to be true i
know it because i believe it and our
beliefs may differ so what we may know
to be true may differ and what
constitutes knowledge or even what
constitutes knowledge of the physical
world might very well come down in part
in many places too subjective feelings
so we are at an interesting juncture we
i say people who might listen to this
podcast people in associated circles
because
just as papa seems to be coming more
widely known than ever and a little more
popular what rises up to meet that
increased popularity of papa is this
stark relativism and subjectivism that
is certainly there in the academy and is
spreading throughout the culture as
things in the academy tend to do the
antidote to this is simply more popper
and better papa rather like the antidote
to erroneous science as many people like
to say is not superstition or
non-science but rather more science and
better science more error correction
better error correction so relativism in
biology the creeping wokism the emotions
surrounding climate change the absolute
terror surrounding certain diseases the
drift towards collectivism driven by a
desire to feel more safe to feel more
altruistic and to feel more certain in
the face of doubt these are all errors
and they need a counter and almost all
the responses i see to this are not able
to appeal to a genuinely objective
response a genuinely objective standard
for knowledge they can only craft
something they claim is objective but
when one prods just a little we find
feelings and emotions again at the core
of what they're saying so what am i
talking about with regards to these
outdated types of epistemology and
outdated notions of knowledge well let's
look at my favorite three that i've
mentioned many times before they will be
one the received wisdom from academia on
these topics which is plato's view of
knowledge more or less the more modern
version is the second kind which is
bayesianism and the pretender to the
throne in some ways that epistemology
that calls itself objectivist
epistemology but isn't anything like it
really so firstly the standard modern
academic take on these things and it
even came up in that other book that i'm
going through at the moment stephen
pinker's rationality so even as late as
when i am going through the science of
canon can't people are still publishing
books taking for granted
justified true belief
that is the standard academic take and
we know it's the standard academic take
even today because the great stephen
pinker himself takes it as
gospel it takes it simply as read that
this is what knowledge is we say we can
know something on this view if we are
justified in believing the claim to be
true so in this vision knowledge is
about believing something it is the
peculiar goings-on the psychology of a
mind this is not objective but
subjective it is about a believing
subject so that's a vision of knowledge
condemned to subjectivity it is about a
personal subjective experience of
believing something and then saying well
therefore that's knowledge or i know the
thing the more modern incantation of
this tries to rescue things by
mathematizing this notion and it's
called bayesianism here we do not give
up the notion of justified true beliefs
we just take on a new character for the
justifications we try to make the
justification objective out there in the
world by saying it is somehow about
objective measurements there in the
world which once you do this measurement
in some way or other you end up having
more credence for a claim and of course
if you put a mathematical veneer on
something then it lends a certain
respectability to your so-called
objectivity with bayesianism i think we
can almost do away with it in the same
way that we would do away with any claim
which corresponds to the old adage of
lies damned liars and statistics
nevertheless on this view of bayesianism
there is a claim that we can know
something to a greater or lesser degree
if there is evidence for the thing and
yes many bayesians will say that if
there's evidence against a thing then
the probability of that thing being true
drops to zero but if you have some
evidence and then you gain more evidence
then the more evidence that you gather
the more credence the claim gets which
is strange for a populion
and pointless as we like to say it's
very rare we have competing theories
anyway we usually have only one theory
going and the reason we have one theory
going is all others have been reduced to
probability zero because we find out
that they're literally not true but in
bayesianism what is this credence anyway
well it's something like degree of truth
or confirmation in fact bayesianism
itself sometimes calls itself bayesian
confirmation theory so it's about
confirmation and even where bayesians
try to be objective the fact remains
that the entire epistemology is about
assigning probabilities to claims and
it's this process of assigning this
process of coming up with some kind of
objective number to put on your claim
that is the subjective part
but what can it mean for any claim like
for example the earth orbits the sun to
have a probability of 50
or 90 or 95
and who decides anyway either the earth
is objectively orbiting the sun in which
case the probability of that happening
is one or it's not in which case the
probability is zero meaning that any
calculation is completely and utterly
pointless certainly in the physical
sciences anyway
by what mechanism can we come up with
these probabilities and as we might say
what is the alternative anyway real
physical reality either is the way that
we explain it is or it's not we either
have probabilities of things actually
being the case or they're not the case
it's one or it's zero so the fact is
that bayesianism itself is refuted by
physics before it even gets its laces
done up the universe is not
probabilistic and so epistemology cannot
be about probabilities it must be about
what is the case and what we mean by
what is the case
is what our best knowledge tells us is
the case the epistemology makes
ontological claims about reality it says
what exists and that is the only way we
know what exists via the explanations
that tell us with probability one what
exists and probability zero what doesn't
exist and in between we just have a
whole bunch of things that we don't know
and it's pointless speculating upon
until we have a good explanation of
those things and lastly for these
outdated refuted old notions of what
knowledge is we have that epistemology
that calls itself objectivism which to
be fair is a broader philosophy more or
less about how to live one's life it's
very much self-help but there is
something which calls itself objectivist
epistemology so we need to address it
here's a book all about it by ein rand
and some of her followers but
reading this book which i have
it
seems to suggest we have two ways of
getting to knowledge and basically the
entire vision of knowledge isn't any
more advanced than what was gifted to us
by
david hume
either we're getting knowledge
via a process of derivation
well
let me quote from the book what anron
writes there is that
quote
axioms are usually considered to be
propositions identifying a fundamental
self-evident truth but explicit
propositions as such are not primaries
they are made of concepts
the base of man's knowledge
of all other concepts all axioms
propositions and thought consists of
axiomatic concepts end quotes
so
in that mood
knowledge production is about simply
beginning with the axioms and then
deriving what is true
from them and on round of course and
perhaps i'll get to this as well
she is very much an empiricist in this
sense that you simply see truth in the
world you can see what is self-evident
and from that self-evident truth there's
no need to interpret anything here
knowledge on this view or rather
observations on this view are not theory
laden they are simply true in and of
themselves and once you know what is
true in and of itself you drive like a
mathematician what the truth of the rest
of your explanatory framework will be
i think this is a complete and not a
dead end of course we need to interpret
our observations
nothing is
as it seems almost let's not even get
into that now to give iran credit she
doesn't say that all knowledge is like
this elsewhere she says and i quote this
is where you can't do derivations of
that kind she says quote the process of
observing the facts of reality and of
integrating them into concepts is in
essence a process of induction the
process of subsuming new instances under
a known concept is in essence a process
of deduction end quote and yes by
induction she really does mean the kind
of induction that hume raised the
problem of how do you ever realize these
universal claims about reality given a
limited number of observations so she
gets what science is all about
completely wrong anyway so there's very
little in the work about science as an
explanatory exercise it's all about
science being a predictive exercise and
making these universal claims like you
know all swans are white or something
like that as if that has anything really
to do with how science works so in this
objectivist epistemology this so-called
objectivist epistemology it is taken for
granted that induction is real and we
simply observe the facts of reality so
there exists direct observation on this
view and further induction is an
unproblematic process of generalization
whatever the case we do not escape from
justified true belief and so to that
extent
objectivism like all the other like
those other two kinds of epistemology i
just mentioned must fall back onto
feelings about whether or not one is
confident one has justified something
and one believes something it's all
happening inside of a human mind there's
very little that's out there in the
objective world the world of objects
that enables one to determine whether or
not one has an objective knowledge claim
a claim that is in fact
a claim that could be true or false
independent of whether or not anyone
thinks it is true or false now
leaving behind the really strict
academic stuff whether it's um looking
at what the ancient greeks said and what
academic philosophers today debate about
what einra said or what a modern
bayesian might say
popular accounts of knowledge today that
you might find in a
scientific american piece which i'll
come to are really no better they get no
closer to actually explaining about how
existing theories came to be how it is
those theories could be overturned and
by what mechanism nor ever really
grapple with
what knowledge is in some fundamental
sense for example the scientific
american here i'll just read
i'll put up on the screen now a quote
from this scientific american article it
reads quote popper's view of the
scientific method that's meant to get
around the problem of induction might
blow the young scientist mind and
convince him that the goal of objective
knowledge is unattainable this would
probably undermine his efforts to build
objective knowledge in the lab end quote
so
well all i can say is wow
this is what can get printed in
something like the scientific american
talking about science and about papa
it's proof positive i would say
the author could not possibly have read
papa i mean to come away from reading
papa to conclude
that
someone might conclude objective
knowledge is not possible it's not
merely to misunderstand papa it's to
ignore him entirely he wrote after all
an entire book
on that exact topic
by the way the author of that piece says
he is a philosopher of science this is
the academic poverty that is the
philosophy of science even today in the
21st century and the poverty of
epistemology and it is why
it really is genuinely a reason why
people end up debating emotions around
matters of scientific importance and new
scientists here on the other hand says
that science is about faith and that we
should not lose
faith in science so there are many many
misconceptions out there about the
nature of objective knowledge none of
these ideas actually hit the nail on the
head about what objectivity is an
objectivity in both senses as i like to
say there's objectivity in the
epistemological sense and there's
objectivity in the ontological sense
they're very closely related and in many
situations you could probably
interchange them but what i would say in
the epistemological sense following papa
knowledge is objective precisely because
it's not about feelings it is not about
subjective feelings of confidence nor
the subjective contents of individual
minds like belief
it is rather about whether a piece of
knowledge objectively solves some
problem or not whether the answer is
given or not whether an error is
corrected or not none of this has
anything to do with
feelings of confidence feelings of
certainty we simply know how is it that
the sun produces so much heat and light
that's a genuine problem absent nuclear
physics especially because so the
history goes prior to about 1900
biologists and geologists were able to
estimate the age of the earth and they
estimated it to be well at least
hundreds of millions and some even
suggested to billions of years old well
that's fine the problem then is if the
only known way at that time to produce
heat and light of the kind we see from
the sun is a fire combustion a chemical
reaction then the sun should long ago
have consumed itself in that fire it's a
standard astrophysics problem for
undergraduates actually
given the mass of the sun how long will
it take given the luminosity of the sun
for it to consume all of its hydrogen
material if it was being burned in the
same way that a fire on the earth is
burning well it would actually last
about 20 000 years that's how long it
would take to consume all of the matter
in the sun at the rate at which it's
burning it given it was a combustion
reaction but it's not a combustion
reaction but people before 1900 didn't
have a clue that it wasn't a normal
combustion reaction well they might have
had a clue because they realized that
the sums weren't adding up they knew
they must have been making a mistake so
they had a problem how to square
the approximate known age of the earth
hundreds of millions to billions of
years it happens to be 4.54 billion we
know that now but at least then they
knew it wasn't 20 000 years how to
square this huge number with the 20 000
year old son maximum of twenty
thousand-year-old son it's a problem
that's a problem but once we have an
understanding of nuclear physics in the
early 21st century then we can say that
problem is objectively solved nuclear
physics explains that the amount of
matter in the sun is more than
sufficient to keep it burning via
nuclear reactions for 12 billion years
or more there problem solved that bit of
knowledge is objective the question is
objectively answered the problem solved
and it's not about anyone being
confident in that answer how confident a
physicist is any particular physicist is
in the answer is beside the point that
is the answer and the only known answer
and notice that no one needs to even
believe it certainly not a consensus of
people need to believe it or understand
it for it to count as knowledge out
there in the world objectively solving
the problem and correcting the error
that the sun must have been like any
other burning object like a lump of wood
that we are familiar with undergoing
combustion the presence of oxygen and
very importantly we should notice that
that same knowledge now that same
knowledge that solved the problem of how
it was that the sun persisted in burning
for so long
is now being used again imperfectly sure
but it is being used to drive the push
towards artificial earth-based nuclear
fusion reactors and guess what that
knowledge is there now that knowledge of
nuclear physics is there instantiated in
a nuclear fusion reactor and should
everyone all the scientists who know how
that thing operates if they were to die
tomorrow but leave behind the react door
itself the knowledge is very largely
preserved because should other people
come along and whether or not they've
got the manuals to operate this thing or
not could study closely the operation of
the reactor itself they would uncover
the knowledge in that object they could
uncover that the fusion reactor actually
instantiates in its super high
temperature plasma producing lasers a
way of overcoming the electrostatic
force of repulsion of hydrogen nuclei to
fuse them into another chemical
altogether and in the process release
vast quantities of energy the knowledge
of how to do that is literally in the
reactor the same relationships exist
between the components of the reactor as
existed in the minds of those now gone
scientists and can now be recreated
literally recreated mind you in the
minds of anyone who focuses
sufficiently on how the reactor is doing
what it is doing so that is what we mean
by objective what popper means by
objective knowledge it means it does not
come down to subjective mental states it
comes down to whether epistemologically
that a claim really solves a problem or
not and we might say following searle
objectively in the ontological sense as
well that knowledge is there in the
object and so it's not about the
particular contents of any individual
mind that is not what makes knowledge
objective and there is no way of making
knowledge objective in that way no
matter what the bayesians say or what
rand says or what the ancient greeks say
or what some scientists or some
popularizers of science or philosophy
claim today objective knowledge is
objective knowledge in the same way that
electrons are electrons it's not because
poppos says it is what it is it just is
what it is millikan or wolfgang poorly
might have had a view on the electron we
don't say the electron is what it is
because wolfgang paulie said this or
that we just say what the electron is so
too with objective knowledge it's not a
matter of opinion it is what it is and
just as with the electron we can improve
our understanding of it over time but
that improvement won't lead us in the
direction of well maybe it's about
feelings after all we no more expect
that than we expect our understanding of
electrons to go back to jj thompson's
1904 plum pudding model of the atom that
model was refuted then it's been
replaced and we're moving forward i say
all of that by way of long preamble
because we are moving forward today we
take poppa and now we add what deutsche
and marletto have said about knowledge
so let's finally begin with some reading
i'll be skipping the first few pages in
which kiara recalls a story from her
childhood and i'll just relate it to you
now in my own words when she comes
across this little hole in the garden of
her home where she once lived in this
little hole eventually it turns out even
when it was disturbed the perfect little
hole in the ground was disturbed by
putting leaves on it or disturbing it in
some other way the next day it would be
repaired perfectly as a little hole and
it turns out the little hole was being
repaired by a mole cricket a little
cricket which would
re-craft the hole once it had been
disturbed so the hole was persisting
over time and that is of course going to
lead us into this concept of
knowledge as being resilient information
in some way or other and there's
something there's some entity that is
causing the ability of that system to
remain
in place over time so let me pick it up
on page 140 of the science of can and
can't and chiara writes quote
most changes or transformations that
happen reliably around us require
something to stay unchanged in the case
of my story the things that undergo a
transformation are the soil and the
grass around where the hole is built
the thing that stays unchanged is the
cricket to be precise the cricket stays
unchanged only in a particular respect
what stays unchanged are all the
features that make it capable of
building a hole for instance it's strong
four limbs which are shaped like shovels
and even armed with sawtooth edges to
excavate more efficiently this
guarantees that the hole can be kept
roughly in the same shape for much
longer than the time over which the
environment operates with its inexorable
erosion pausing there my reflection so
here we're getting a hint of that
there's these two kinds of knowledge in
the world and um kiara doesn't uh
distinguish between these two because
she's got a unified concept of knowledge
but the two versions that david deutsch
talks about are the knowledge of the
genetic kind in the dna of organisms and
which arose via evolution by natural
selection
and the knowledge that appears inside
the peculiar minds of people which is
this explanatory knowledge which arises
via a process of creative conjecture and
refutation and so here we have an
example of the kind of knowledge that
arises through evolution by natural
selection and what we have is i guess a
vision of
dawkins
extended phenotype this um this idea
that the dna
inside of an organism actually reaches
out beyond its own body and so encoded
somewhere
in the dna of the cricket is a code for
building little holes and so the dna
actually reaches out into the external
environment beyond the body
of
the cricket into
the soil and and constructing holes in
the soil so there is there is there is
abstract knowledge in the dna of the
cricket the cricket is a physical
instantiation a kind of catalyst of a
sort
the thing that if you disturb the hole
if you muck up the hole if you go and
put a stick in the hole and you know
just destroy the little crickets um
habitat
then it will repair it and so the hole
will persist why will the hole persist
because the knowledge is there able to
do the job of repairing okay back to the
book car writes any transformation
happening reliably with a high accuracy
such as making a perfectly round tunnel
requires something such as the cricket
that stays unchanged in its being
capable of causing it again
the entity must retain that property
because that is necessary for the
transformation to happen reliably to
clarify the point in the whole making
transformation things like enough space
and soil and the cricket are all
necessary but as i said it is only the
cricket that remains the same before and
after the transformation in some respect
the soil gets abraded away the space is
used up by the hole and so on but the
cricket for its lifespan is very nearly
unchanged in that key ability things
that can perform a transformation and
retain the property of doing so
repeatedly such as the cricket deserve a
unifying name
catalysts is a good one
here one has to be careful because i'm
borrowing the term from chemistry to
indicate a much more general class of
systems than chemical catalysts chemical
catalysts are entities that make a
chemical reaction happen more quickly
and faster when they are present and
that retain the property to do so over
and over again they operate a bit like
facilitators when all the other reagents
are around but the catalysts are not
there it takes ages for the reaction to
happen and other reactions may well
consume the reagents first but if
catalysts are present then the reaction
happens quickly and deterministically
since chemical catalysts are
distinguished from reagents because they
do not change while everything else does
i shall use catalyst to indicate systems
that can cause a transformation and
retain the property to do so like the
cricket in my story pausing near my
reflection so i might just mention my
favorite catalysts class of catalysts
here which are the catalysts that allow
for the arbor process the harbour
process being the
combination of gaseous nitrogen with
gaseous hydrogen in order to produce
ammonia this is a remarkable life-saving
reaction and is just one of those
wonderful examples where we show that we
really have made objective progress in
the world science really does help
everyone on the planet industrialization
is a wonderful thing and so on and so
forth the problem is how to make arid
land able to grow crops the overwhelming
majority of land on planet earth where
there is land can't be used to grow
crops because the soil isn't fertile
enough what it needs to have in it is
nitrogen nitrogen fixed so they say in
the soil what scientists knew was that
well you could use ammonia to make
artificial fertilizers in order to make
the soil fertile and therefore grow more
crops but the question is how do you
make ammonia how do you get sufficient
quantities of ammonia in the first place
well they knew of a reaction a reaction
was well this one here you just take
nitrogen and you take hydrogen and then
you produce ammonia but big issue it's
not really a spontaneous reaction you
don't just mix gaseous nitrogen and
gaseous hydrogen and get ammonia at the
end it doesn't work that way even if you
pressurize it and you use high
temperature it still doesn't work very
well but
if you add a catalyst at the right kind
and very many different kinds of
catalysts are used i think one is
powdered iron but there are all sorts of
other fancy kinds that these guys arba
firstly i think but once you once you
have the right catalyst and you manage
to figure out the most efficient
temperature and pressure then once you
put it in the right vessel with the
catalyst the nitrogen and the hydrogen
then you get vast quantities of ammonia
being produced you get lots and lots of
the stuff and so this literally this
reaction these catalysts have saved
countless people's lives they have fed
countless hundreds of millions one would
want to say maybe billions of people's
lives we're able to support so many more
people on planet earth precisely because
of this reaction it is a wonderful
lesson about science and progress and
might i say so-called artificial
chemicals after all if anything is
artificial it's this process it is very
hard to do it doesn't happen
spontaneously very easily certainly not
with the efficiency required creating
the volumes required so this is a
very much a
man-made knowledge-based way of feeding
the world using lots of chemicals
in order to encourage the growth of
plants now what chiara is of course
talking about when it comes to
catalysts here knowledge as being a
special kind of catalyst we have
the the knowledge itself well in the
form of the cricket here we have the the
cricket being the catalyst which enables
the construction of the hole over and
over again the construction of the
burrow over and over again that even
when the burrow is disturbed or
destroyed along comes the cricket and it
will just keep on rebuilding that thing
over and over again but the cricket
itself has not changed even if the
burrow is and as she will come to
shortly as kiara will come to
the knowledge has to be in an abstract
form inside
of the cricket and that would be in the
dna program so to speak for constructing
a cricket that program for constructing
the cricket building the cricket from
the material out of which the cricket
itself is made
would also code for holes in the ground
which can house a cricket and so that is
a very specialized kind of knowledge
one then wonders and i wonder
can there be a universal
knowledge catalyst of this kind a
universal abstract catalyst which can
transform anything into anything else
that's known
well this is what a person is one
presumes that the program for
a person
is that kind of universal catalyst which
can take material of any kind and with
the relevant knowledge could construct
any other thing that is constructable
so that is what a person might turn out
fundamentally to be or more
fundamentally to be but we get ahead of
ourselves let's go back to the book
kiara writes quote why are catalysts in
this generalized sense interesting
answering this question will require one
to understand the link between catalyst
and knowledge as i introduced in chapter
one the reason is that most systems
undergo changes during processes that
involve them
i.e they do not stay the same unlike
catalysts also most transformations in
physics do not happen reliably those
that do require a catalyst that can
perform them catalysts and likewise
highly accurately perform
transformations are hard to come by
some of you might be suspicious of the
notion of hard to come by it sounds too
subjective what looks hard to realize
for some might be very easy for others
actually that is not the case hard to
come by has an objective meaning
established by the laws of physics one
thing is harder to come by than another
in this sense if the former requires
compared with the latter more of what is
naturally given by the laws of physics
for it to emerge this notion is
objective because what the elementary
elements are things like energy time
elementary chemicals and so on is set by
the laws of physics take a look around
and see what is not hard to come by what
the laws of physics gave us in abundance
are things like elementary particles and
fields entities which as we have learnt
via modern physics are used to explain
the existence of elementary particles
themselves and their mutual interactions
for example if we see electrons and
protons being attracted by what
classically we would call the
electrostatic force we do not have to
invoke anything else but the laws of
physics to explain that attraction i
call things that are given in abundance
in our universe such as fields and
particles naturally occurring systems
and likewise the interactions that need
no more than the laws of physics as we
know them to be explained fully i call
naturally occurring interactions among
these naturally occurring systems and
interactions there are a few accurately
and reliably performed transformations
for example the planetary orbits around
the sun are almost elliptical so one
could say the task of making the planets
describe elliptical orbits is well
approximated in nature this fact is a
direct consequence of naturally
occurring interactions because there is
a symmetry in the gravitational
potential that causes the orbits to have
approximately that shape in the case of
such transformations what has to stay
unchanged for them to be performed to a
high degree of reliability the catalysts
are just the underlying physical laws
which do not require further explanation
pausing near my reflection so yeah for
stuff that we see out there happening
for example planetary laws and
incidentally there's a wonderful
conversation at a very high level i
would say a technically high level that
sean carroll the physicist on his
mindscape podcast has with kiara maletto
that's worth looking up and listening to
sean actually brings up the case of
orbits planetary orbits because it would
seem that we have good explanations of
planetary orbits using
various other models i mean we could use
kepler's laws of physics and we could
say well kepler's laws of physics
actually uh
somehow come out of newton's law of
gravity of course what do we how can
constructive theory uh
say anything about this particular
situation of planetary orbits well well
there it is there it is in the sense
that what the laws of physics are are
like a catalyst a catalyst that itself
remains unchanged while causing the
position of a planet around a star to
change that's the thing that is changing
over time but the laws of physics aren't
changing they're the one thing that
remains unchanged while all these
transformations are going on out there
in the physical universe in astronomy
whenever you have one body orbiting
another it's a another way of
approaching the same physical situation
namely that of planetary orbits so let's
go back to the book more on catalysts of
this kind
quote
but most of these kinds of
transformations are not like that
there's more to them some non-elementary
catalyst must be present for them to be
performed to high accuracy think again
of the hole in the grass being formed
and reformed that is not directly
explainable given the laws of physics
because there are no naturally occurring
interactions that cause tiny holes in
the grass to materialize and be
maintained to a high accuracy unlike
planetary orbits
the mole crickets holes in the grass of
course obey the laws of physics but to
explain their persistence we need some
additional bit of explanation involving
the cricket likewise to explain most
transformations that happen accurately
and reliably we need some additional
explanation this explanation will
involve the concept of a catalyst but
also of information as defined in
chapter three in terms of
counterfactuals it will involve a
particular type of information which can
enable its self-perpetuation in chapter
one i called it knowledge to explain how
most transformations happen to a high
degree of accuracy in other words we
need to resort to a new class of
counterfactuals pausing now my
reflection yes i've made a big deal of
this over some recent podcasts of mine
some very recent episodes the big deal
being people
will sometimes
the determinists will say well
everything just debates the laws of
physics as if that's an explanation
but it's not an explanation
uh it's true something can be true and
yet be
next to in relevant to the question at
hand
it's almost vacuous it's not utterly
vacuous of course to say
everything that happens out there in the
physical universe
the universe obeys the laws of physics
but that gets you not very far unless
you're trying to explain exceedingly
simple systems like
planets orbiting stars planetary orbits
yes then you can explain that purely in
terms of laws of physics
or when you have subatomic particles
interacting can be explained purely in
terms of laws of physics you might even
say that you know classically the high
school undergraduate physics
situation of
some object sliding down a frictionless
ramp can be explained purely in terms of
laws of physics although there you might
have a little bit of a problem because
even there one might wonder why is that
object going down the frictionless plane
uh did someone let it go and if so why
so then we start to expand out with
planetary orbits we don't need to worry
about the why who put that object in
orbit we have other explanations for
that the reductive explanation actually
gets you all the way to the answer for
that so as as chiara says here
it's
not really informative to say that
something like a cricket building a
burrow is simply obeying the laws of
physics that's not enough that's not
going to be able to explain what's going
on you need something deeper there's
knowledge there in the dna of that
cricket and that cricket then is able to
construct the hole because somewhere in
that dna of the cricket
there is code for building holes okay so
now i'm going to skip
quite a
long
passage quite quite a fair a few
paragraphs and chiara talks about well
what would it take to stop
the building of holes in gardens of the
kind that the cricket builds well maybe
in an extreme case you might say well
kill the cricket but as she says now
that won't be enough killing that
cricket won't stop holes being built by
crickets in general as she says
even if you were to destroy all the
crickets in your garden there would be
something that survives and that is the
genome that codes for the mole cricket
the genome is information as i said in
chapter three because it can be copied
during dna replication so what you
really should destroy is that piece of
information if that is not destroyed the
cricket could always be brought back to
life via some laboratory experiment
along the lines of what happened in the
film jurassic park and that would cause
the whole making transformation to
happen again and again just as before so
that piece of information contained in
the genome is the thing that you would
ultimately have to destroy in order for
the mole cricket activity to cease
forever so the genome is the thing one
would have to exterminate in order to
stop the transformations caused by a
living entity now i'm going to skip the
next part where kiara relates a story
that chiara tells this story and the
story is basically about how well it's a
science fiction story that she read as a
child
her father told her as a child about how
in the future humans are trying to help
these aliens who are infected by
bacterial disease and the way they help
the aliens is by programming nanobots
with the genome essentially the dna of
the bacterium in order to have the
nanobots attack the bacterium and so the
the nanorobots the miniature robots are
able to get into the bacterium and
destroy that sequence of the genome to
prevent the bacterium from replicating
it's something like that anyway
but the point here is that the genome
contains information information of what
kind is it abstract
yes let's go back to the book chiara
says quote the genome is not an ordinary
catalyst it has two additional
properties it is information because it
can be copied in the process of dna
replication and it causes itself to
remain instantiated in physical systems
over generations because it guarantees
that the organism for which it codes can
survive in a certain environment i shall
call this type of information an
abstract catalyst catalyst as i said
because it can enable transformations
and retain the property of causing them
again abstract because its identity does
not depend on the physical systems in
which it is embodied it can be copied
from one embodiment to another without
changing its properties it could be in
dna or in a nano robot's computer
according to our criteria in chapter
three an abstract catalyst is made of
information for it is copyable also it
is information that is capable of
enabling its own preservation in the
terminology of chapter one it contains
knowledge end quote just my quick
reflection here yes so we already know
that dna
is a form of abstract knowledge because
we can read dna we can sequence the
genome which means that we take whatever
information is in the dna of the cells
of a human or any other organism can be
taken and in a laboratory a printout
made and stored in a computer and then
in even the further distant future you
would be able to take whatever that
readout is in the computer
where that information is in an abstract
form it's not made of
dna stuff it's not made of a double
helix instead it is made of zeros and
ones being represented inside of a
computer but that information could then
be taken and then
turned back into dna which is the double
helix and this is what it means for
something to be abstract abstract
information means that it is substrate
independent it doesn't matter
whether it's actually physical dna zeros
and ones in a computer or in a possibly
ridiculous case
writing it out in handwritten agtc
sequences of base pairs on a piece of
paper that could in principle be done
but all of those whether it's the
physical dna itself
whether it's the zeros and ones in a
computer whether it's agtc written on
pieces of paper would all represent the
same bit of knowledge that bit of
knowledge which codes for the
construction of some organism
represented by that dna back to the book
and kiara writes quote before moving on
i want to clarify something important i
just said that a catalyst can enable or
cause transformations on physical
systems
truth be told the term causation has
acquired especially in physics circles a
bad reputation saying that a catalyst
has the ability to cause certain
transformations could therefore be
misunderstood for one of these bad ways
of looking at a cause but it isn't
when we say that the catalyst causes a
transformation we mean simply that the
transformation occurs only when the
catalyst is available and that the
catalyst retains the property of making
the transformation occur
over and over again
although other notions of causes are
problematic and seem arbitrary in
physics this one is not because it is
clear when some system is or is not a
catalyst
for instance one can say that the
catalyst that produced a blue-green
algae cell is the parent cell that
originated it via self-reproduction
indeed the parent cell is the particular
cell that is capable of constructing the
daughter cell by using the information
in the dna the dna and the rest of the
cell in this context are only systems
necessary to the transformation which
also stay the same in the ability to
enable the transformation again before
and after the transformation the
retention of this ability is a
distinctive and objective feature of the
catalyst which does not apply to other
elements in the environment for any
transformation that occurs in physical
reality one can unambiguously identify a
catalyst that is capable of realizing it
and of retaining the ability to cause it
again it is the catalyst for the
transformation one can think of it as a
cause of the transformation how do we
distinguish abstract catalysts from
other kinds of information we need to
look for information that can enable
transformations and is resilient again
biology seems to provide a useful
example where abstract catalysts are
distinguished from genetic information
think of a plant for instance a maritime
pine tree standing on the ligurian coast
even before visualizing the tree one can
perceive its scent after the rain
molecules of particular chemicals called
terpenes are released by the tree and
cause the air to be permeated with that
characteristic fragrance
zooming in one can take a closer look at
the minute green needles that line the
tree's branches going in closer still
one reaches the level of a single cell
of the pine tree closer still and one is
looking at a dna strand inside the cell
let's look for the abstract catalysts in
the cell every part of the dna strand in
the cell contains information in the
sense i explained earlier in this book
this is because the strand is
copyable it is copied in the process of
dna replication when cells reproduce
however only some pieces of that dna
strand code for something
these bits are what biologists would
call adaptations an adaptation as
already mentioned in chapter one is a
piece of information in the dna with the
ability to enable a certain trait to
emerge in the organism that hosts the
dna we say that it codes for that
particular trait for instance there is a
bit of dna that codes for the colour of
the pine needles such as that particular
shade of green that pine trees have
however not all adaptations are
resilient which is the other salient
property of abstract catalysts to be
resilient in a given environment an
adaptation needs to be
useful it must increase the probability
that the genes that code for it will be
passed on to the next generation and
preserve for generations in that given
environment pausing there my reflection
there we get useful so
remember we have
this
three-pronged porpyrian deutsche notion
of what knowledge is and chiara is
adding to that with the notion of
resilience but it captures the same idea
of
knowledge on the one hand being
that kind of information which once
instantiated somewhere tends to cause
itself to remain so i love that it's
nice and poetic but we can also say
succinctly that knowledge is
useful information
now one might very well ask
what does it mean to say useful what i
would say is that there's the third part
of this little fork of different ways of
coming to an understanding of what
knowledge is in this popularian
framework
that being
knowledge is information that solves a
problem and the problem here might be
how to be passed on to the next
generation how it is that the
species the genes whatever however you
want to frame this um the the organism
continues to survive or at least passes
on its genes to the next generation so
that that
species continues to survive because the
genes continue to survive okay skipping
apart and i'm just picking it up where
kiara writes quotes being a useful
adaptation guarantees the survival of
that piece of information with causal
abilities it is what guarantees that it
is resilient
and that it qualifies as an abstract
catalyst so the information in a piece
of dna may or may not be an abstract
catalyst depending on whether or not it
can propagate itself for generations
thus remaining instantiated in physical
systems generalizing from this biology
example information that can enable
transformations on physical systems must
also be resilient in order to qualify as
an abstract catalyst so catalysts are
systems that can enable transformations
and retain the ability to cause them
again
abstract catalysts are catalysts that
are copyable and can perpetuate
themselves they are catalysts made of
resilient information
which we call knowledge it's pausing
there going back and just repeating that
because
that's knowledge dense there and
knowledge density about knowledge
again
abstract catalysts are catalysts that
are copyable and can perpetuate
themselves they are catalysts made of
resilient information which we call
knowledge in other words knowledge is
resilient information as we learned in
chapter one of the science of canon
cards let's keep going
kara writes
now an intriguing fact that i am about
to explain is that all catalysts must
contain an abstract catalyst catalysts
in other words must have some properties
that are invariant no matter what
transformation they are intended for and
that invariant part must be made of
knowledge as i'm about to illustrate
this remarkable fact is due to the
particular structure of the laws of
physics in our universe
let's consider the example of assembling
an aircraft from elementary components
in the airbus factory the elementary
components are the sub-parts of the
plane such as wings engines seats and
wheels but to be more expansive we can
think of the whole process that produces
an aircraft out of even more elementary
entities such as metals plastic and
similar materials
the whole factory is the catalyst for
this transformation
where is the abstract catalyst as i said
it is the thing that ultimately one has
to eliminate for the factory to stop
working properly okay so it's pausing
now my reflection so this idea of the
abstract catalyst is that one crucial
thing that would ensure
that if you destroyed it you wouldn't
have resilient information anymore
resilient information
is knowledge acknowledges that
information which continues to get
itself copied and replicated over time
so what could possibly stop that
destroying the abstract catalyst
where is the abstract catalyst in this
particular case you can probably guess
continuing
chiara says
imagine a slight modification to the
factory for example by introducing a
floor in its production line if it is a
well-run factory there is a way to fix
the problem and thus restore the
production process so that change is
inconsequential for the output however
if you destroy the sequence of
instructions for constructing the plane
or the instructions for repairing the
factory the factory might have to shut
down the recipe for the aircraft must be
copied for the factory to survive it is
the abstract catalyst that keeps the
factory going for years this recipe is
the set of instructions to realize the
construction of the aircraft to the
accuracy set by the factory standards it
is a recipe in the sense that it is a
sequence of steps that one has to follow
in order to forge the metals into the
shape of the plane the recipe for a
fully fledged aircraft is what allows
the construction of the aircraft to
happen reliably because the final
product is checked against the procedure
until it meets the criteria set by the
quality control of the company also the
recipe is preserved down the line for
decades so it is what allows aircrafts
to be produced over and over again
sometimes the recipe can be slightly
improved but it is preserved in its
ability to create an aircraft that can
fly safely and swiftly thus aside from
all the various things that the factory
contains there is a particularly
important piece of information which is
copied from generation to generation in
order for aircrafts to be produced to
the factory standard
losing this recipe would make the
factory fade away and even if an alien
civilization were to find the remains of
the aircraft factory in order to make it
functional again they would have to find
the recipe or figure it out themselves
the recipe is the abstract catalyst and
it is made of knowledge pausing near my
reflection and although kiara doesn't
say it here one would presume
that if the aliens found a
non-functional factory that's one thing
even if all the raw materials were there
but if the aliens also had
aircraft fully functioning aircraft well
then that aircraft
contains the knowledge
implicit implicit not explicit but
implicit within it of how to construct
itself if they were sufficiently careful
and undid every nut and bolt very very
carefully then they could
rebuild the thing or they could
replicate it so a fully functioning
aircraft over here
could lead to given a factory another
fully functioning copy of that aircraft
over here it'd be very hard it's not the
ideal way to do it you'd rather have a
plan written out but in theory you could
deconstruct the aircraft produce a plan
then reconstruct presumably as long as
your error correcting very carefully
very accurately along the way but in
principle it could be done so this is
the sense in which the knowledge is
there
in objects it's objective knowledge
another form another way of talking
about this is of course reverse
engineering let's keep going kyra writes
in order to be compatible with the laws
of physics we know the recipe must have
the form of a sequence or combination of
elementary steps to see why we must
understand that laws of physics do not
contain any protocol to preserve or
create complex entities such as
aircrafts or even wings or things of
that type
leave an aircraft for a while in a
desert without being repaired or checked
and will soon become unfit to fly as i
said in chapter one the only thing that
the laws of physics preserve directly
are elementary components and
interactions and elementary symmetries
they are no design laws ultimately
physical laws provide only very simple
types of transformations that can be
performed reliably without there being a
recipe those corresponding to naturally
occurring interactions
these are transformations that happen
spontaneously such as the oxidation of
the coating of an aluminium surface or
the molecules of air in an oven heating
up the surface of a cake such
transformations are elementary steps
that do not need further maintenance to
be realized in a stable manner in fact
they do not need to be specified in the
recipe because they are implicit in the
laws of physics i've uncovered a
regularity in the way abstract catalysts
appear they must be realized as a recipe
a sequence of elementary steps
non-specific to the output each of which
does not require further explanation and
which can be considered as a direct
consequence of physical laws okay that's
wonderful there i'm going to skip a part
where
we'll basically carrie just talks about
how in biology we're familiar with
the appearance of design organisms have
the appearance of design it's as if
there is a designer behind the design of
various things but we know now that's
not the case that
evolution by natural selection explains
how you can have this ratcheting up of
complexity over time and the increasing
appearance of sophisticated design but
of course that appearance design is
better described as the illusion of
design anyway cara goes on to say quote
whenever you see something with the
appearance of design that can last a
long time you can rightly assume that
some abstract catalyst is contained in
it
i have said that most transformations
that are possible in the physical world
must occur via a catalyst that enables
them i have also noted that all
catalysts must contain an abstract
catalyst which is itself made of
knowledge
as introduced in chapter one knowledge
is defined entirely via counterfactuals
it is information that is capable of
remaining instantiated in physical
systems
unlike most definitions of knowledge the
good thing about this one is it does not
depend upon there being a knowing
subject and oh yes you better believe
i'm going to repeat that
[Laughter]
quote
knowledge is defined entirely via
counterfactuals it is information that
is capable of remaining instantiated in
physical systems
unlike most definitions of knowledge the
good thing about this one is that it
does not depend it does not depend on
there being a knowing subject going on
this way of looking at knowledge based
on counterfactuals breaks with a
long-standing tradition which regards it
as a chiefly anthropomorphic subjective
concept that tradition says that
knowledge requires there to be a
sentient being such as a human to exist
knowledge in other words would only
exist in minds
according to this idea knowledge appears
to be subjective something like that is
very remote from the laws of physics in
contrast knowledge as defined here as it
occurs in abstract catalysts is sharply
different the main two differences are
that this entity is objective it can
exist irrespective of whether there is a
knowing subject and it is a possible
subject for physics as i said those who
know the philosopher karl popper will
recognize the chief features of his
epistemology in the characteristics of
this concept however with the science of
canon can't i have related knowledge to
physics
something beyond the domain of
epistemology which we can do because we
are using counterfactuals in physics
there have been several discoveries of
new types of stuff for example at some
point it was realized that all engines
used some type of energy heat and
transform it partially into another type
of energy work
it was then natural to wonder how to
express the laws about these two types
of energy and that gave rise to
thermodynamics likewise in this case it
is natural to wonder
can knowledge be created can it be
destroyed can it be transformed
this problem is a deep one and it is
only partially solved so far
the science of canna cart provides an
objective handle on knowledge it gives
us tools that may one day be used to
answer these questions fully pausing now
my reflection isn't that wonderful
anyone who is interested in philosophy
epistemology and physics
has a real opportunity to contribute to
the frontiers of all those areas by
investigating the science of canon cart
reading about constructor theory
trying to push the frontiers forward in
constructive theory so anyway young
people out there listening
this would be a wonderful opportunity to
go into an area which
hasn't so far proved to be a dead end
like many of those other kinds of
cutting edge areas of physics that have
been around for many many decades
and don't seem to be doing too much in
the way of making progress towards
solving particular problems in physics
but bringing epistemology within
the sphere of physics
physics has this as david deutscher said
before this totalitarian character of
gradually coming to encompass
every other subject and now epistemology
it's wonderful so
this idea of counterfactuals being
very much at the heart of what
epistemology is about and whether it's
possible for a thing to be known for
this particular knowledge to be
constructed whether this particular
piece of knowledge can be created or not
is going to come down to physics
that's exciting stuff okay i'm skipping
a little bit and then i'm picking it up
where we're just getting right to the
end of the chapter so this will be the
last
bit that i read from the book from this
book
and kiara writes quote
with this new perspective we have a
different angle on theories that deny
that knowledge could be anything
substantial or of scientific interest on
the grounds that it might be associated
with an anthropocentric attitude there
is nothing anthropocentric in abstract
catalysts
their capacity to enable transformations
is objective in fact knowledge and
knowledge creating entities are singled
out as significant properties of our
universe but this is not as in religious
explanations because of some dogma it is
because of a physical explanation
knowledge is a particular property that
matter can have in our universe
say that again
knowledge is a particular property that
matter can have in our universe which
exists when abstract catalysts are there
and it is fascinating to study its
regularities how it comes into existence
how it evolves and whether it can be
sustained and grow indefinitely and this
becomes through this approach via
counterfactuals a problem for physics
maybe one day we will be able to solve
it
end quote end of chapter five isn't that
wonderful that is just absolute cutting
edge epistemology
that is right at the edge of
what is known about knowledge right now
that we now have this concept of an
abstract catalyst this thing that
contains the information allowing the
transformation of matter into some other
kind of matter and which as i like to
say enables us to solve our problems and
just by way of i suppose
showing
due respect to the person that started
all this
we have the
very latest in what knowledge is about
there from kiara maleto following the
work of david deutsch let's have a look
at what
popper actually said it'd be remiss of
me to
to not read just something brief
from objective knowledge where papa
actually talks explicitly about
objective knowledge so again just to
hammer the point home that
knowledge should not be seen as
something about merely
what people are thinking on a given
topic that knowledge really is out there
in the world kiara's made that point
forcefully there that it is part of
physics importantly it is a property
that matter can have in our universe
where did this all start who kicked this
off well popper himself and he wrote
this is page 115
of the chapter that's called
epistemology without a knowing subject
and he wrote
quote
one of the main reasons for the mistaken
subjective approach to knowledge is the
feeling that a book is nothing without a
reader
only if it is understood does it really
become a book otherwise it is just paper
with black spots on it this view is
mistaken in many ways
a wasp's nest is a wasp's nest even
after it has been deserted even though
it is never again used by wasps as a
nest
a bird's nest is a bird's nest even if
it was never lived in
similarly a book remains a book a
certain type of product even if it is
never read as may easily happen nowadays
moreover a book or even a library need
not even have been written by anybody a
series of books of logarithms for
example may be produced and printed by a
computer it may be the best series of
books of logarithms it may contain
logarithms up to say 50 decimal places
it may be sent out to libraries but it
might be found too cumbersome for use at
any rate years may elapse before anyone
uses it and many figures in it which
represent mathematical theorems may
never be looked at as long as men live
on earth yet each of these figures
contains what i call objective knowledge
and the question of whether or not i am
entitled to call it by that name is of
no interest
the example of these books of logarithms
may seem far-fetched but it is not i
should say that almost every book is
like this it contains objective
knowledge true or false useful or
useless and whether anybody ever reads
it and really grasps its content is
almost accidental a man who reads a book
with understanding is a rare creature
but even if he were more common there
would always be plenty of
misunderstandings and misinterpretations
and it is not the actual and somewhat
accidental avoidance of such
misunderstandings which turns black
spots on white paper into a book or an
instance of knowledge in the objective
sense rather it is something more
abstract
it is its possibility or potentiality of
being understood its dispositional
character of being understood or
interpreted or misunderstood or
misinterpreted which makes a thing a
book
and this potentiality or disposition may
exist without ever being actualized or
realized pausing near my reflection so
that's just worth lingering on there
it's about potential possibility
the possibility or potential of being
understood or misunderstood so if
something could possibly be understood
but never is or possibly misunderstood
but never is that's the point it doesn't
matter whether it actually is
misunderstood or actually is understood
it's just that it could be understood or
misunderstood therefore it must contain
knowledge of a kind knowledge that is
capable of being understood or
misunderstood and as he says that it
doesn't matter whether that's actualized
or realized that that that's inherent
within itself
inherent within as kara might say it's a
property of the matter itself that that
matter contains information that could
be understood or not
papa goes on to say quote
to see this more clearly we may imagine
that after the human race has perished
some books or libraries may be found by
some civilized successes of ours no
matter whether these are terrestrial
animals which have become more civilized
or some visitors from outer space these
books may be deciphered they may be
those logarithm tables never read before
for argument's sake this makes it quite
clear that neither its composition by
thinking animals nor the fact that it
has not actually been read or understood
is essential for making a thing a book
and that it is sufficient that it might
be deciphered thus i do admit that in
order to belong to the third world of
objective knowledge a book should in
principle or virtually be capable of
being grasped or deciphered or
understood or known by somebody but i
did not admit more okay then papa goes
on to criticize a whole bunch of
competing epistemologies which uh all
very similar in very many ways but
i can't
let things go without mentioning this
passage
from papa which is i'm skipping forward
to page 141
i have some remarks on probability
theory
and he writes
quote
nowhere has the subjectivist
epistemology a stronger hold than the
field of the calculus of probability
this calculus is a generalization of
boolean algebra and thus of the logic of
propositions it is still widely
interpreted in a subjective sense as a
calculus of ignorance or of uncertain
subjective knowledge but this amounts to
interpreting boolean algebra including
the calculus of propositions as a
calculus of certain knowledge of certain
knowledge in the subjective sense this
is a consequence which few bayesians as
the adherence of the subjective
interpretation of the probability
calculus now call themselves will
cherish
this subjective interpretation of the
probability calculus i have combated for
33 years
fundamentally it springs from the same
epistemic philosophy which attributes to
the statement i know that snow is white
a greater epistemic dignity than to the
statement snow is white
i do not see any reason why we should
not attribute still greater epistemic
dignity to the statement in the light of
all the available evidence to me i
believe that it is rational to believe
that snow is white the same could be
done of course with probability
statements okay and obviously there is a
far more to be gained by
reading this in terms of understanding
the nature of objective knowledge but
for now i think we've covered everything
from where it began this notion of
objective knowledge to where we are as
of 2021 and our appreciation of the
cutting edge of epistemology really
where we are in the most modern sense
where we've done away with criticized
refuted
those other subjectivist notions of what
knowledge is which have plagued
philosophers and unfortunately still
plague especially academic philosophers
even through to today and which students
of philosophy are still taught and of
course as we often complain here
papa simply isn't studied enough that
people often have to
leave academic institutions in order to
really get a handle on what papa says
about these important issues of
objective knowledge philosophy more
broadly but hopefully one day there
might be an institution of some kind who
wants to take on you know degree
programs in papa and constructor theory
i'm sure that would be absolute anathema
to david deutsch but
[Laughter]
but maybe it would be a completely
non-coercive
way of teaching a new generation of
people how to make objective progress
out there in the world
after all at the moment uh the
university seems to be in a
well a difficult situation let's just
say that but for now until next time
when we are up to episode 99 of topcast
which will be a special one episode 100
will be a special one which will be the
full interview with david deutsch and
indeed episode 101 and maybe 102 will be
a special one as well and ask me
anything episode and um
my patreons will get will get first kick
of the ball so to speak in asking me a
question they've asked me on patreon
i've put the call out on twitter if
you'd like to ask me a question for an
ask me anything episode i'm not planning
on doing these
particularly regularly at this point but
maybe episode 101 and episode 102
possibly will be devoted to me
responding to questions from people
who have questions about the last
episodes of
topcast but until next bye
[Music]
you